**6.1 Words and morphemes**

Words are **free forms that have meaning**. There are three main reasons why they are considered free. Firstly, they can appear in **isolation**, meaning that in some contexts a single word can be a whole, perfectly grammatical utterance. Secondly, they are **moveable** – they can occupy different positions in a sentence. Lastly, they are **inseparable**, which means that no other pieces can be randomly put inside them. However, there are smaller forms than words that contain meaning – **morphemes**.

We distinguish two types of morphemes: **free morphemes** (they can stand on their own, which means that some words can also be morphemes) and **bound morphemes** (they have to be attached to something else, for instance units, such as _-ed_, which carries the past tense meaning, and _-s_ or _-es_, which indicate grammatical number). We can divide words into those that consist of only one morpheme, described as **morphologically simple**, or **monomorphemic** and words that have more than one attached morpheme, called **morphologically complex** or **polymorphemic** words. The latter are built of a **root** (a single morpheme that determines the core meaning of the word) and one or more **affixes** (bound morphemes that can be attached to the end of a root, called **suffixes**, or to the beginning of a word, called **prefixes**). In some other languages, for instance, Tagalog, there are also **infixes** – morphemes that are placed in the middle of a word.

**6.2 Allomorphs**

One morpheme might have more than one **allomorph**. It simply means that depending on the surrounding environment morpheme can have different but related forms that still have the same meaning. For instance, _a_ means “one of something, but not any particular one” and it appears before words that start with consonants, but changes to _an_ when it stands before words that begin with vowels. Another example is an English plural morpheme. It can be represented as _-s_, in words like _books_ or _apples_, but as _-es_ in words like _bushes_ or _churches_, however, in each of these examples it carries the same meaning of “more than one”.

**6.3 Inflectional Morphology**

**Inflectional morphology** conveys grammatical information, such as number, tense, agreement or case, therefore, the role of **inflectional morphemes** is to add this information to a word.

The first example of inflectional morphology is a **number** on a noun. In English, the plural number is represented by either _-s_ or _-es_, but there are also irregular plural morphemes. Other languages, such as Manam, have a morpheme for the dual number, which indicates exactly two of something. Another example of inflectional morphology is a **tense** on a verb. In English, tense inflection is indicated by morpheme _-ed_ or a change in the vowel of the verb. **Agreement** on verbs is another kind of inflectional morphology. It occurs in languages, such as French, Spanish or Italian, in which the suffix at the end of a verb changes depending on who the subject of the verb is. For instance, _je chante_ (ang. _I sing_) and _tu chantes_ (ang. _you sing_). There is also **case** inflection, meaning that the morphology on a noun changes depending on the noun’s role in a sentence. For example, in German sentences _Der Junge sieht Sofia_ (ang. _The boy sees Sofia_) and _Sofia sieht den Jungen_ (ang. _Sofia sees the boy_) the word _Junge_ has different morphemes to indicate its different roles – in the first sentence it is a subject and in the second it is an object.

**6.4 Derivational Morphology**